Today marks a very special day for me. Ten years ago today, March 20, 2009, my
[first
patch](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/commit/ccedb6d5677c5dabf187e241d0aa97b134b152df)
to an open source project ever was merged.

#

Fall 2008 was my freshman year in college. As a computer science/math double
major (at the time), I wanted to learn about as many programming languages as I
could, so I could figure out which ones I liked. My only programming
experience til then was writing AppleScript scripts as a young child (yes,
AppleScript was my first programming language), a one week summer course where
I learned the basics of C in my junior year of high school, and, most
seriously, messing around with my programming my TI-89 in my junior and senior
year of high school (including an unbeatable tic-tac-toe game with 9 AI level
settings). The TI-89, for those who don't know, is the more "advanced" Texas
Instruments graphing calculator that has the ability to do symbolic
calculations, even computing symbolic integrals.

My freshman intro to CS course was taught with Java, which I soon learned was
one of the worst programming languages ever made, due to the obscene amount of
boilerplate required to do even the simplest tasks, and the fact that it
forced everything into an object oriented paradigm. However, one of the people
in the university IT department ran a free once weekly course on a programming
language called Python.

Python immediately stuck with me. The fact that I could just write `x = 1`
without defining any types reminded me of TI-89, and the syntax was
boilerplate free and easy to remember. I honed my skills by solving some
[Project Euler](https://projecteuler.net/) problems. I used a printed out copy
of [this Python
reference](http://infohost.nmt.edu/tcc/help/pubs/python25/web/index.html)
written by the university IT department person who taught the minicourse. This
reference was my bible for learning the language. Whenever I wanted to find a
function to do something, or forgot some syntax, I flipped through it until I
found what I was looking for.

As the spring semester came, I decided I wanted to try to find some kind of
internship for the summer. I don't remember how I learned about [Google Summer
of Code (GSoC)](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/), but it seemed like a
great opportunity. I could find a cool open source project to work on, and
work completely from my parent's home during the summer. Naturally, I wanted,
if possible, to work on something that involved Python. I also wanted to work
on something that tied in to math somehow, since math, not programming, is my
real passion. So I searched for GSoC organizations related to Python that used
math, and found a little suborganization of the Python Software Foundation
called SymPy.

On [Ï€ day,
2009](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/sympy/v8z-PkzmDDQ/aNGhDqOTMLsJ), I
sent my first mailing list post to a public open source project.
